
  The History of CircleMUD

As told by its author <http://www.circlemud.org/~jelson/>.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


    What Has Come Before

A MUD <http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~lwl/mudinfo.html> (Multiple User
Dimension or Multiple User Dungeon) is a computer program which allows
Internet users from around the world to connect to it, create fictional
characters for themselves, and then interact with other real users as
well as computer-generated entities in a virtual environment. Users can
explore their virtual world, talk to or perform actions with other human
players, roam through dangerous monster-infested areas, solve puzzles,
and seek treasures. DikuMUD <http://www.dikumud.com/diku> is a
particular class of MUD which tends to be combat-oriented with a look
and feel similar to some (non-computerized) role-playing games
<http://www.common.net/~shadow/rpg_index/>. CircleMUD is a derivative of
DikuMUD.

While Circle still retains the "look and feel" of the original DikuMUD,
it has dozens of additional features and bug fixes, and much of the code
has been rewritten to be more flexible, efficient, easy to understand,
and easy to extend. CircleMUD's history began in January of 1992 when
development on it started on one of the DECstation 3100's
<http://www.digital.com/home.html> in Johns Hopkins'
<http://www.jhu.edu> Department of Computer Science
<http://www.cs.jhu.edu>. Most current development takes place on a
home-built 486 DX2/80 running Linux 1.2 <http://www.linux.org>.


    From Innocence to Addiction

I was introduced to MUDding in my first semester at Johns Hopkins
<http://www.jhu.edu> at the tender age of 17 when I noticed some friends
playing an interactive, multi-user game -- WhatMUD, a MUD run at Hopkins
by undergraduates Dave Reed and Justin Chandler. I began to play,
choosing "Rasmussen" as my character's name (after the character
Berlinghoff Rasmussen, star of that week's new 'Star Trek: The Next
Generation' episode.) After WhatMUD was forced to close in November of
1991 due to a hardware failure, I found a copy of the DikuMUD source
code and began developing my own MUD, finding that working "behind the
scenes" at creating a MUD was far more enjoyable and interesting than
playing one.

After a couple of weeks of learning how the DikuMUD source code was
organized and adding a couple of elementary new features, my fledgling
MUD was (covertly) tested for the first time by several of my friends
and me. Dubbed 'CircleMUD' in honor of the DECstation on which it was
running (circle.cs.jhu.edu), the MUD seemed to work well and (still
covertly) was opened to players on a very limited basis.

Development and limited play-testing continued for several weeks, and
Circle began to get a fair amount of word-of-mouth popularity on the
Hopkins campus; between 8 and 12 people could often be found logged in
at once. At this point (January 1992), I decided to take the big plunge
and inform the Computer Science system administrator (at that time, Tim
Stearns) of CircleMUD's existence, knowing it would either lead to the
MUD's immediate demise or open the doors to running it in the open
without having to hide it.


    The Adventure Begins

Happily, Tim responded positively, declaring that Circle would be
welcome in the Computer Science department as long as I made sure it did
not use more than 2500K of disk space. With that fateful email, I
happily declared in Circle's MOTD (Message of The Day -- the message
users see when logging in), "CIRCLEMUD IS HERE TO STAY!!", officially
opening Circle to players on a full-time basis.

At first, Circle was plagued by the same problems many other MUDs have
-- instabilities in the code and a lack of features. However, my
advantage was that I was a programmer, whereas many other MUD
administrators of that era (and even today) were solely game-players,
not programmers, and weren't capable of fixing many of the more elusive
bugs. Circle soon became and exceptionally stable and bug-free MUD -- a
reputation which I think it still maintains to this day. I was also able
to create other special features such as a MUD Mail system (commonplace
today, but rare at the time.)

I never advertised CircleMUD in any public forum such as the DikuMUD
newsgroup. Through word-of-mouth advertising alone, Circle became
moderately popular; it became standard to find 30 to 40 people playing
during the afternoon. The operating system under which Circle was
running (Ultrix 4.0 on a DECstation 3100) limited the MUD to about 58
players -- a limit which was reached several times over the course of
Circle's existance.


    The End?

However, the dark side of MUDding soon reared its ugly head, as
political battles ensued in Circle's later months of operation. I had
appointed several players as "Gods" (i.e. administrators) to help the
"mortals" (i.e., players) with problems, and received much grief as some
of the Gods vehemently opposed my policies or choices of which Gods
should receive promotions. Some "Immortals" (i.e., players who have
received enough points to 'retire' from active play, and are granted
special privledges) also loudly opposed me. One of them even kept
likening me to Hitler.

Not all Gods and Immortals were causing problems; indeed, many of them
became close friends in "RL" (Real Life -- i.e., off the MUD). However,
finding that I was devoting more time to politics than coding, faced
with the imminent loss of the circle machine as a site on which to run
the MUD, and given an offer to work solely as a coder (and not as a
political administrator) on a new MUD running at Hopkins called JediMUD,
I chose to permanently bring CircleMUD down on August 26, 1992.

The decision was certainly not made without much disappointment from
many of Circle's players; indeed, at least 8 of them offered the use of
their machines for me to use as a new home for Circle. However, not
wanting to deal with the political problems of running a MUD on my own
or dealing with a "foreign" site to run my MUD from, I instead archived
the CircleMUD code and became a full-time coder for JediMUD at the
beginning of September, 1992.


    A New Beginning

It should here be noted that an individual who wishes to start his or
her own, new MUD must first find a "code base" -- i.e., a currently
existing MUD on which he or she can build. The original DikuMUD,
released in 1990, was not desirable to many people because it had many
bugs and did not have any "modern" MUD features which most MUDs of the
day already had. Most MUD implementors kept their code closely guarded,
not wanting to work for hours to create special new features only to
have some other MUD use them.

The few MUDs which had released their code publically were better than
the original DikuMUD, but were often difficult to find (you usually had
to get them from someone who knew someone who knew someone who had a
copy), and some were quite old and did not have many modern features. At
least one publically available MUD, SillyMUD, did have many fancy
features, but was large and unwieldy. In addition, many people did /not/
want to start with a MUD which had fancy features -- they wanted to
start with a very "plain" MUD, so as to be able to add their /own/ fancy
features based around their /own/ vision of how a MUD "should" be.

Another publically available MUD, Merc DikuMUD, was compact an
efficient, but had a very different "look and feel" than the original
DikuMUD -- in fact, much of the DikuMUD code and area files were not
even compatible with Merc, turning many MUD implementors away from it.

All of the publically available code, with the notable exception of
Merc, also suffered from the problem of portability: if the person who
released it was using a Sun running SunOS, and your machine an SGI
running Irix, you were in for some major headaches getting their code to
work on your system.

In May of 1993, in light of all the above circumstances, in addition to
the constant pleas on the USENET newsgroup rec.games.mud.diku from
people asking where they could get a nice copy of DikuMUD source code, I
realized that there was a big niche waiting to be filled in the DikuMUD
world. A well-written, stable, bug-free, publically available and easily
accessible DikuMUD code base was needed. A code base which was fancy
enough to have the standard features which most contemporary DikuMUDs
players and implementors expected, yet basic enough to allow each
implementor huge latitude in customization, and which which would be
easily portable to many different operating systems and hardware
platforms. I decided that with a little work, CircleMUD would be perfect
to fill that niche.


    The Adventure Begins Again

I pulled the original CircleMUD out of its archive, and for many weeks
during the summer of 1993, devoted almost all of my spare time to
modernizing and improving Circle. I infused Circle with much of the Diku
code I'd written while working for JediMUD, in addition to dozens of
other new features and optimizations.

CircleMUD 2.0, the first public release of Circle, was quickly becoming
a reality. Circle 2.0 was specifically written to be very small and
efficient -- indeed, the basic system used only about 2 megabytes of
memory (an unprecedented amount at the time -- most MUDs of its size
used 6, 8, or even 10 megs.) Circle 2.0 was specifically designed to be
flexible, easy to expand, and easy to debug -- a starting point upon
which other MUD implementors could easily turn their dreams of what a
MUD should look like into reality.

CircleMUD 2.0 was relased on July 16, 1993. Here is the post which
accompanied it:


---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wake the kids and find the dog, because it's the FTP release of


                    C  I  R  C  L  E  M  U  D     2  .  0


That's right -- CircleMUD 2.0 is done and is now available for anonymous FTP
at ftp.cs.jhu.edu!

CircleMUD is highly developed from the programming side, but highly UNdeveloped
on the game-playing side.  So, if you're looking for a huge MUD with billions
of spells, skills, classes, races, and areas, Circle will probably disappoint
you severely.  Circle still has only the 4 original Diku classes, the original
spells, the original skills, and about a dozen areas.

On the other hand, if you're looking for a highly stable, well-developed,
well-organized "blank slate" MUD on which you can put your OWN ideas for
spells, skills, classes, and areas, then Circle might be just what you're
looking for.

Just take a gander at some of Circle's nifty features:

	-- In-memory mobile and object prototypes and string sharing for
	   decreased memory usage and blazingly fast zone resets

	-- All large realloc()s have been removed and replaced by boot-time
	   record counting and a single malloc() for superior memory efficiency

	-- Split world/obj/mob/zon/shp files for easy addition of areas; plus,
	   all the world files are still in the original Diku format for
	   compatibility with existing areas

	-- Boot-time and run-time error checking of most data files with
	   diagnostic messages a lot more helpful than "segmentation fault"!

	-- Player mail system and bank

	-- Rewritten board system: boards are now stable, robust, more
	   intelligent, and easily expandable -- adding a new board is
	   as easy as adding another line to an array

	-- ANSI color codes with a fully documented programmers' interface

	-- On-line system logs

	-- Optional automatically regenerating wizlist -- a final end
	   to new immortals constantly asking you when they'll be added
	   to the immlist!

	-- "config.c" file allows you to change aspects of the game such
	   as playerkilling/playerthieving legality, max number of objects
	   rentable, and nameserver usage -- WITHOUT recompiling the
	   entire MUD!

	-- All text (help, mortal/immort MOTDs, etc.) is rebootable at
	   run-time with the "reboot" command

	-- All players are given a unique serial number -- no more messy,
	   time consuming str_cmp()s when you're trying to identify people!

	-- Fully integrated and robust rent/crash system -- allows normal
	   renting, cryo-renting, crash protection, and forced rent
	   (at an increased price) after an hour of idling

	-- All the standard wizard stuff you're used to: level-sensitive
	   invisibility, settable poofin/poofouts, wizline

	-- Advanced 'set' command which allows you to set dozens of aspects
	   of players -- even if they aren't logged in!  "Stat" also allows
	   you to stat people who aren't logged in!

	-- Intelligent 'autorun' script handles different types of reboots,
	   organizing your system logs, and more!

	-- Circle comes with more than a dozen utilities, all fully
	   documented, to make maintenance a snap!

	-- And much, much more!

Unfortunately, the original Circle had more than its fair share of Bad People
when it was alive, but it DID lead to an impressive list of security and
"asshole control" features:

	-- 3 types of sitebanning available: 'all' to refuse all connections,
	   'new' to refuse new players, or 'select' to refuse new players and
	   all registered players who don't have a SITEOK flag.

	-- 'wizlock' allows you to close the game to all new players or all
	   players below a certain level.

	-- Handy 'mute' command squelches a player off of all public
	   communication channels

	-- Handy 'freeze' command freezes a player in his tracks: the MUD
	   totally ignores all commands from that player until he's thawed.

	-- Even handier DELETE flag allows you to delete players on the fly.

	-- 'set' command (mentioned above) allows you to freeze/unfreeze/
	   delete/siteok/un-siteok players -- even if they aren't logged in!

	-- Bad password attempts are written to the system log and saved;
	   if someone tries to hack your account, you see "4 LOGIN FAILURES
	   SINCE LAST SUCCESSFUL LOGIN" next time you log on.

	-- Passwords don't echo to the screen; allows 3 bad PW attempts
	   before disconnecting you.  

	-- Players aren't allowed to choose their character's name as their
	   password -- you'd be surprised how many do!

	-- "xnames" text file specifies a list of invalid name substrings
	   to prevent creation of characters with overly profane names.


Listen to all the rave reviews of CircleMUD 2.0!

        "How long ago was that deadline you set for yourself?" -- My Friend

        "NO ONE should be denied the power of computation." -- My Professor

        "Multi-user WHAT?" -- My Mom

Give it a try -- what do you have to lose other than your GPA/job, friends,
and life?

---------------------------------------------------------------------------


    CircleMUD Today

Since Circle v2.00, many new features have been added; much of the code
has been revised or completely rewritten to be smaller, easier to
understand and modify, more efficient, and more functional. The most
current version is v2.20; the release of CircleMUD 3.0, eagerly awaited
by much of the Circle and Diku communities, is scheduled for release
later in 1996.

Since its original release, the various releases of CircleMUD have been
downloaded tens of thousands of times from its official FTP archive by
users from every corner of the United States and from over 65 foreign
countries. It has also been downloaded an unknown number of times from
dozens of other FTP sites in the U.S. and abroad which started carrying
it (most of them through Linux mirroring). A CircleMUD mailing list,
with a readership of about 350 people in May of 1996, was established
for users of Circle to discuss their experiences, toss around ideas,
exchange code, and propose new directions for future versions of Circle.

Circle was designed to be highly portable on as many Unix systems as
possible; it is known to run under Ultrix, SunOS, Solaris, IRIX, AIX,
Linux, HP/UX, ConvexOS, and other versions of Unix using the GNU
autoconf package. Using the WinSock API, it is even possible to compile
and run CircleMUD under Windows 95 and Windows NT! In addition,
CircleMUD users have also ported Circle to the Amiga and OS/2.

Hundreds of MUDs around the world are based on CircleMUD (here's a small
list <http://www.circlemud.org/sites.shtml> of a few of them). New
Circle-based MUDs pop up almost every day, and I've recieved thousands
of pieces of mail from thrilled users who love the code. Some use it to
run huge MUDs intended to attract an international audience; others just
use it to hack on at home and maybe share with their friends or
schoolmates. It makes me very happy to know that I've contributed to the
total amount of coolness inherent to the Universe, even if CircleMUD
really is a small contribution in the grand scheme of things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
<-- Back to the CircleMUD Home Page </>

jelson@circlemud.org

<http://www.circlemud.org/~jelson>

Last updated: 1 May 96

