
    Idealized MUD Administration

Jim Lai AKA GrimJim. Copyright 1999-2001.
Permission is granted for unlimited not-for-profit reproduction.
Version: Draft 0.21

There are not rules so much as guidelines. I've been on MUDs on and off
since January 1990 and have seen many a MUD wither, splinter, or explode
under the stresses of internal conflict. Ultimately, all the problems
involve a lack of open communication or an inability to anticipate
people's reactions. Below are a few strategies to minimize such
communication problems. Administration is by definition a political
process. Being able to hack code is not enough. One must be able to hack
people.

*1. Recognize that friendship is not enough to guarantee you will get
along with them as staff.* Conflict resolution skills are vital to
keeping a staff reasonably united.

/Why:/ You will be working with them closely. It is a working
relationship, and slackness now spills over to relations with players
(possible strangers), not just among friends.

*2. Intra-staff communication is vital.* Regular meetings to inform each
other of what has been done is good. Mailing lists work well if people
have difficulty establishing a regular meeting time. Other staff should
be notified if a decision might impact them. There are plenty of free or
near-free mailing list servers out there one can employ.

/Why:/ Without this communication, one staffer may make rulings which
contradict another, or duplicate work effort during construction. Such
conflicts should be resolved before a wily player attempts to play off
different staff against each other. Failures to keep all staff informed
will make your staff appear disorganized and ill-informed, which would
be the case!

*3. Appear firm and consistent.* Players as well as staff like to be
informed of why things happen.

/Why:/ If they believe the adminstrators to be capricious, trust is
lost. If it degenerates you'll have players holding conspiracy theories
about you, believing you to be capable of any and every wrongdoing.

*4. Establish duties, a chain of command, and appeal.* It may be there
is no avenue of appeal, but it should be established and preferably
documented.

/Why:/ This prevents staff from trampling on each other's toes. It also
keeps staff from being at a loss when unable to answer questions about
policy by players.

*5. Avoid the perception of undue favoritism.* This may mean sacrificing
a bit and limiting one's actions as staff. Simply put, be sensitive to
the perceptions of players.

/Why:/ Due to rampant abuse on the net, players are sensitive to the
phenomenon of adminstrators creating a place in order to steal the show,
as it were, using the MUD as a vehicle for self-gratification. Don't
think they won't recognize it if they see it.

*6. Draft an Acceptable Use Policy (AUP).* Define what is allowable and
what is not. This will minimize the likelihood of accidental
transgressions.

/Why:/ Sometimes players may simply be antisocial. A mechanism is
required to preserve the atmosphere for the majority of players. Being
able to point to an acceptable code of behavior is vital to being able
to declare certain actions as transgressions while remaining objective
as possible.

*7. Be straightforward.* Do not hedge behind false pretenses. Tell both
staff and players up front what you intend and why if there is room for
doubt. White lies can be as destructive as malicious falsehoods.

/Why:/ Doubt breeds distrust. If you give a false reason for an action,
you may later be caught short if that reason is shown to be invalid or
no longer applicable.

*8. Choose staff carefully.* You want people who will work with you, and
not subvert you nor play manipulative games among the staff. It helps to
be a good judge of character. In particular, observe their faults under
stress. Also, avoid having too many staff and not enough duties to go
around; if a duty does not require full MUD security privileges, then
they should not be granted.

/Why:/ There are some people who have ambitions and will attempt to
acquire varying degrees of power beyond their mandate. Don't expect
people when given power not to use it.

*9. Learn to delegate.* If you've picked a reliable staff, you can trust
them and spread the work of running a server around. Minimize your own
personal stress.

/Why:/ If you truly think you can or have to do everything yourself, why
bother having "useless" staff around? Use them or remove them. If they
aren't helping, then they can only be a hindrance. Be careful about
burnout, though.

*10. Early access is risky.* If you decide to go beta (allow player
access before the game is complete), be prepared for the consequences.

/Why:/ Player expectations are often high; it would be prudent to manage
them with news articles lest your staff be inundated with newbie
questions. Expect complaints for things that are broken or haven't been
even coded. Do not open up if you are in alpha stage with major chunks
of functionality incomplete.

