*A Machiavellian Wizard Lecture*

Release 1.0

/It is better to be feared than loved, if one cannot be both./
*Niccolo Machiavelli*

This modest proposal is intended as a further expansion of the section
of the MUSH manual called "The Fundamental Laws of Wizarding" and
Amberyl's wizard lecture document, aimed primarily at MUSH
administrators. The following has been amended to incorporate actual
practice.

Administrators may wield power, but they are not invulnerable.
Fortunately, lawsuits to date have not been a major threat.
Nevertheless, this document attempts to describe a practical and
realistic code of behavior that administrators can follow while
maintaining their position effectively.

Since administrators' actions reflect upon the entire MUD as a whole,
and not just themselves, the most important thing is to not get caught
or be seen as unethical. In practice, administrators still shall do as
they please. Below is some advice which will assist in meeting all these
goals.

   1. Players are paranoid about their privacy. A good MUSH
      administrator should alter @sweep and any such reporting tools to
      be silent about reporting DARK wizards, so as to remain hidden.
      Similarly, avoid telling another about what you find when invading
      others' privacy. Loose lips sink ships. One must strive to
      maintain the illusion of respecting privacy. Finally, never post
      or mail logs.
   2. Do not use @teleport frivolously. Players chafe when you
      demonstrate capabilities they do not have nor can they defend
      against. Similarly, a JUMP_OK place is not necessarily a public
      area. One must not be perceived as a clueless admin. Feign
      courtesy if you must. Or @set yourself DARK.
   3. Never use stolen code in a place where the original author may
      find out about it, lest the original author raise a fuss. If you
      can improve the code and make it thus unrecognizable, so much the
      better. To allay suspicions that you may be hoarding code, have a
      small stock of code you can freely give away.
   4. Do not reveal sitenames to non-administrators unless you can
      ensure they will not involve you as an accomplice in a personal
      vendetta, or reveal they have privileged access. Their needs do
      not serve you.
   5. Do not alter other peoples' objects without permission unless the
      persons involved are generally unpopular. Popular support from the
      player base is more important than a few troublesome players.
      There will always be a few disgruntled invidivials to be dealt with.
   6. Do not coerce a player object without the player's consent. Make
      backups if you must temporarily change something. Players do not
      forgive easily, and their memories are long. Besides, they have
      big mouths.
   7. Avoid untimely use of @find, @search, and any other performance
      reducing commands; lock them out from players if need be. The last
      thing your site needs is a reputation for being badly lagged.
      Similarly, keep the number of objects and attributes on objects in
      any parent rooms and objects to a minimum.
   8. Wizard-only commands must be made secure from intrusion. Aside
      from the issue of reputation, security is necessary to avoid
      sabotage. If you can't trust your underlings, dispose of them. Do
      not trust mortals with wizard powers, as the other players will
      hold you responsible for their mistakes. Soft-coded administration
      commands are highly vulnerable. Remember that this fact cuts both
      ways when exploring competitors MUDs.
   9. Do not spam players with unnecessary @shouts. Players are a
      short-tempered, ungrateful lot and do not tolerate spam. If you
      are in an ill mood, go DARK and hide.
  10. Learn to code for and maintain your MUD site competently, lest you
      be considered clueless or a player sneak some abusive code past
      you. If you can't do it, find someone trustworthy who can.
      Besides, being unable to maintain your server will leave you the
      laughingstock of other competing administrators.
  11. Never wizard while being intoxicated or act rashly when you are
      enraged. It is unbecoming to a ruler to be seen as a bumbling
      idiot or a malicious fool. Instead, put off annoyances
      indefinitely until you want to deal with them. Players do not
      easily forget a short-tempered wizard. Always try to maintain a
      position where the annoyance is perceived by others to be at
      fault. Feign politeness if you must. An alternative is to have a
      spurious wizard character which you log into solely to abuse
      players; occasionally "discipline" your wayward wizards to
      maintain the illusion. Players who are considered an annoyance by
      the majority of other players may sometimes be dealt with out of
      hand, however.
  12. Be lenient the first time with rules-breakers. One must maintain
      the facade of fairness. Ignoring annoying players sometimes works.
      Alternately, find someone else with more patience to foist this
      task upon. Feel free to draft a confidential blacklist of
      troublesome players and pass it along to other administrators. Of
      course, a person need only have /allegedly/ violated rules in
      order to get on the list. It's a lovely tool for character
      assassination if used judiciously.
  13. When seeking out potential wizards, ensure that you can deal with
      them effectively in case of disputes. Dealing with players is
      troublesome enough without having to deal with rebellious staff.
      Be sure of their loyalty. If you do not actually have access to
      the machine the MUSH is hosted on, it is possible for the database
      to be usurped if the system administrator conspires with wizards
      who are ill-disposed towards you.
  14. In times of conflict, make logs to better defend your actions. In
      some circumstances, even a doctored log is better than no defense
      at all. Putting players on a warning list or a blacklist may be
      necessary. Feel free to spread rumors and half-truths so long as
      they can be plausibly backed-up. Remember, perception is not reality. 

These guidelines are here to make the task of wizarding simpler for you.
They exist to provide at least the illusion of ethical behavior; in
general, if you follow these guidelines, players will find it quite
difficult to accuse you of abusing your wizpowers and be able to back it
up. They thus work for /your/ protection, albeit not the players'.
Players, often suffering from self-esteem problems, frequently take
wizard mistakes personally and seriously, and often carry grudges as
well as lumping all wizards in the same category. Players who are
paranoid tend to be more difficult to deal with; thus, for the sake of
your sanity and that of every other wizard who ever has to deal with
that player, try to appear faultless. If you consistently have personal
problems with a player, you should also avoid wizard dealings with that
player; have another wizard handle the situation instead. Or if they are
someone whom you can @destroy without consequence, so be it.

In all things, use common sense, and try to appear calm and impartial.
When all else fails, log off or shut down the site to prove to the
MUSHing serfs who's really in charge.

Oh, and have a nice day.


Jim W. Lai

