	


    MUD LEADERSHIP AND THE ADMINISTRATION


Brian Green, pchild@iastate.edu <mailto:pchild@iastate.edu>
Psychochild@Kerovnia

I enjoy MUDs. As a player/coder/administrator, I have always taken an
interest in the leadership capabilities of the administration on
different MUDs. What trends in MUD leadership are there and how do these
trends affect the MUDs? The answer to this question is very important to
administrators who wish to attract and keep players.

I fear the growing trend is for administrators to reduce interaction
with players. In my opinion, this is very detrimental to the MUD. Not
only do administrators lose touch with the players, but they also lose
touch with the MUD as a whole.

When I first started playing MUDs, I noticed that many wizards had very
little idea of what it was like to be a player. Many did not know how
quickly a player could advance his or her standing, or simple questions
that new players may ask. I vowed that when I began to code, I would not
lose touch with the players as many other wizards had.

However, the reality was different. When I began to code, I lost touch
very quickly. Without the interaction with the players, I found myself
not knowing simple questions that new players may ask. This disturbed
me, and I strove to answer the question: Why did I lose touch?

I evaluated the goals of the players and the goals of the coders and
administrators. I compared my goals as a player to the goals of other
players on the MUD at the time. Most players wanted to play a game and
to have fun. They wanted a consistent world in which to challenge
themselves. They wanted everyone to have the same advantages, with no
one person or group having more advantages than another.

The goals of the administrators were very similar. They wanted to the
players to have fun, to recognize their MUD as superior for various
reasons including fun, flexibility, social atmosphere, etc. They felt
they should provide a fair and balanced system for the players to
interact with.

One might ask, where is the problem? Obviously both groups are working
toward a common goal. Both groups want a fun and memorable environment
to enjoy and share with others. Although these statements are true,
there is a fundamental problem that causes problems is the lack of
communication between the groups. Without interaction there is no
understanding and therefore no system for both to enjoy.

There is a problematic belief in MUDs today that ruin true, meaningful
communication between players and administrators. Many believe that
administrators cannot and should not interfere with players. Although it
prevents many potential abuses, it prevents true interaction and
understanding of each group by the other.

This belief is absolutely untrue. Since MUDs are generally dynamic in
nature, thus giving them a big advantages over packaged computer
role-playing games, administrators must make changes to the system,
usually on a daily basis. These changes will affect players, thus
altering their playing environment. Although certain changes may be
minor, each change alters the form of the system, changing the way
players view and interact with the system. Therefore, administrators
already interfere with player actions in an indirect way due to
necessity. One must then realize that the administrators may also
constructively interfere with the players in a direct method.

When administrators do not interact with players, they lose a valuable
asset: player feedback and opinion. Although a proposed change to the
system seems numerically balanced and fair, players can often see the
unbalancing effect of such a change due to their practical experience
with the system. If administrators test the new change before it is put
on-line, they can learn of these problems. Administrators should learn
that there is a difference between the views that each group has of the
system of the MUD.

To solve this problem, administrators should strive to open the channels
of communication. Administrators should try their hand at the games they
design and code, to get a more practical feel for the game. They need to
view things through the players eyes to really know what the game is
like. Often, when administrators view the game solely from the abstract,
numerical, or code point of view, they lose touch with the players they
wish to attract and entertain. Only by playing within the system using
the given rules can administrators truly understand what they have created.

There are some issues that need to be addressed before this can be
advocated as the best solution. Administrators must remember that they
have much more information about the inner workings of the game than the
average player does. Due to their limited time, administrators often use
"above character" information to achieve whatever goal they want. This
gives them a false perception of the system they have created. In
addition, many administrators lower themselves to the realm of cheating
and abusing power in order to give themselves a better character. A good
administrator must avoid these traps if he or she wishes to truly learn
more about his or her system.

It is unfortunate that administrators lose touch with the players.
Without a good knowledge of the game, they cannot make good decisions to
keep the game fun and balanced. If administrators were to become better
acquainted with the game from a practical as well as a numerical
standpoint, they would be better able to make a game everyone could
enjoy. As a player, coder and administrator, I have made encouraging
interaction between the players and administrators a personal goal.

/[Editor's note: Green's Comment suggests a number of interesting
research directions. The transition from player to administrator, with
all the concomitant changes in activities, goals, and views, has
received little attention in the literature. In addition, the general
issue of how a MUD is perceived by different player groups may offer
intriguing opportunities for further study.] /

	


