_


      A Footnote to Confessions

_ /I recently wrote someone an email about The Confessions of an
Arch-Wizard <confessions.html> and I thought it worthwhile quoting some
of this as a proper footnote to the original document. MJL, 5th January,
2003./

Ok, here's a "real life" confession that perhaps adds some weight to the
philosophy behind confessions.

My problem with MIST was that ultimately, it wasn't a very difficult
game to play. There is a balance of making a game interesting and
violent, and in making it difficult. It's not difficult to kill a lot of
the players on the game if you have a shotgun or a chainsaw, and without
a shotgun, a chainsaw, a poleaxe and for example, the odd brand that
would kill anyone with one blow, MIST wouldn't have been MIST. If you
were a strong, high level character the game got easier (unless someone
made sure the lower characters had the nasty weapons) but the bottom
line was that as a traditional goal oriented game, it wasn't that hard
to make Wizard on MIST. My aim was to have an end-game where becoming a
Wizard was more the start of the game than the end.

The philosophy of the age, and indeed, the only philosophy was the
Bartle-approach. This was obvious on the two commercial games of the
time, MUD/British-Legends and Shades. Players would play the game,
players would make Wizard and then it would end. They would get some
warm feeling or other of achievement being a Wizard, they would sit
there organising party events and the like but frankly, as a novice on
Shades in 1983, being a Wizard looked about as interesting as being a
Nursery School Teacher. I wrote my first proper MUA (called MUCK) in
1984, and it was unusual in having no wizards, and being far more of a
modern less goal-oriented society based MUA than anything of its time -
It would have been great but since each move took up to a minute, it
wasn't very popular.

When I took on MIST in 1987 I saw an opportunity to "change the world" -
Why not have Wizard as just another player level? If a game is full of
Wizards, then why not let them have to play the game to survive as well
- But how? Wizards are powerful and immortal, that's coded into the
game, that's what it says and that's how it is. The Bartle-approach
makes for a lazy game, it uses technology to replace the "Dungeon
Master" and it relies on Wizards to help it along - It doesn't work, it
doesn't make for an interesting game, it shouldn't really keep people
with any intelligence coming back and it can be boring as hell unless
those Wizards are allowed to exercise their powers to their full extent
and be responsible for the consequences of that. The Bartle-approach
creates a dead end - You are a Wizard, you are destined to a life of
running my game and doing what I tell you do do. Yippee-Fucking-Do Man!

I hope that I changed that. A MIST Wizard was never, ever under any
illusion at all that he ran the game for me, and a MIST Wizard was never
ever told what they could and could not do - At least, they were, but
they were told different things so that the people with any imagination
and intelligence could start to realise that maybe, just maybe, the game
hadn't ended and the play was now far more sneaky and political than it
was before. The aim now was to survive purges, to maybe be promoted to
one of the new levels that would come and go, to gain favour with "them
up top" and to have as much fun and create as much havock as they could
get away with. I insult my Wizards in "Confessions" but that is because
I want to show that they are players as much as a Novice is a player.
Did the Arch-Wizards run the game? No, not really... My Arch-Wizards (in
various forms of capitalisation) were there as administrators and a
perceived authority. I was the "Dungeon Master" and unlike the
Arch-Wizards of MUD and MIST, I took a final responsibility to run the
game as an all powerful and mischeivous being as opposed to just a
boring and fair overseer. I ran the world's only free and easily
available MUD, and I like to think that when people look back they will
say "Lorry? He was a complete bastard, but MIST was one hell of a game."
- If they do, then I succeeded; but as it says at the end of
Confessions, 5 years of very active involvelement for 6 hours a night,
340 odd days a year takes a lot out of a person.

On the subject of the MIST T-Shirt picture
<http://arch-wizard.com/Mist/>, the caption is /"Do what thou wilt shall
be the whole of the law. I am the law!" / because this eventually became
MIST's Slogan. Buuuut, the original caption of that picture was /"Fuck
off back to your own game!"/ - The MIST Arch-Wizard is Lorry and the
little traditional Arch-Wizard on the toadstool is a well-known MUD2
Arch-Wizard. It is actually based on a true-event somewhere deep in the
game's history that symbolically at least marked our complete divergance
from any involvement with the original ethos of MUD.

I am tempted to add this little explanation as a "footnote" to
confessions, maybe it's about time I explained it a bit.

Michael.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
/ This page is looked after by Michael Lawrie <http://www.lorry.org/>. /
